README_flex.md, before:

# STAR-Flex: Inline Hash Pipeline for 10x Flex Samples

This document describes the flex pipeline integration in this STAR fork.

## Overview

STAR-Flex extends STAR with an inline hash-based pipeline optimized for 10x Genomics Flex (Fixed RNA Profiling) samples. Instead of the standard two-pass Solo workflow, the flex path processes reads in a single pass:

1. **Sample tag detection** during alignment identifies multiplexed sample barcodes
2. **Inline hash capture** stores CB/UMI/gene tuples directly in memory
3. **CB correction** applies 1MM pseudocount-based correction (Cell Ranger compatible)
4. **UMI correction** uses clique-based 1MM deduplication
5. **Cell filtering** via OrdMag (simple EmptyDrops) or full EmptyDrops per sample
6. **MEX output** produces raw and per-sample filtered matrices

When `--flex no` (default), STAR behavior is identical to upstream.

For detailed technical documentation of the data flow and algorithms, see [docs/flex_methodology.md](docs/flex_methodology.md).

## Quick Start

```bash
STAR \
  --genomeDir /path/to/flex_reference \
  --readFilesIn R2.fastq.gz R1.fastq.gz \
  --readFilesCommand zcat \
  --soloType CB_UMI_Simple \
  --soloCBwhitelist /path/to/737K-fixed-rna-profiling.txt \
  --flex yes \
  --soloFlexExpectedCellsPerTag 3000 \
  --soloSampleWhitelist sample_whitelist.tsv \
  --soloProbeList probe_list.txt \
  --soloSampleProbes probe-barcodes-fixed-rna-profiling-rna.txt \
  --soloSampleProbeOffset 68 \
  --soloFlexOutputPrefix output/per_sample \
  --soloMultiMappers Rescue \
  --soloCBmatchWLtype 1MM_multi_Nbase_pseudocounts \
  --soloUMIfiltering MultiGeneUMI_CR \
  --soloUMIdedup 1MM_CR \
  --soloFeatures Gene \
  --outFileNamePrefix output/
```

## Required Inputs

| Input | Description |
|-------|-------------|
| Flex reference genome | Hybrid genome with probe pseudo-chromosomes (see [Building References](#building-references)) |
| CB whitelist | 10x barcode whitelist (e.g., `737K-fixed-rna-profiling.txt`) |
| Sample whitelist | TSV mapping sample tag sequences to labels |
| Probe list | Gene list from probe set |
| Sample probe barcodes | 10x probe barcode sequences file |

## Parameters

### Master Switch

| Flag | Default | Description |
|------|---------|-------------|
| `--flex` | `no` | Enable flex pipeline (`yes`/`no`) |

### Sample Detection

| Flag | Default | Description |
|------|---------|-------------|
| `--soloSampleWhitelist` | - | Path to sample tag whitelist TSV |
| `--soloProbeList` | - | Path to probe gene list |
| `--soloSampleProbes` | - | Path to 10x sample probe barcodes |
| `--soloSampleProbeOffset` | 0 | Offset in read for sample probe sequence |
| `--soloSampleSearchNearby` | `yes` | Search nearby positions for sample tag |

### FlexFilter (Cell Calling)

| Flag | Default | Description |
|------|---------|-------------|
| `--soloFlexExpectedCellsPerTag` | 0 | Expected cells per sample tag |
| `--soloFlexExpectedCellsTotal` | 0 | Total expected cells (alternative to per-tag) |
| `--soloFlexAllowedTags` | - | Optional: restrict to specific sample tags |
| `--soloFlexOutputPrefix` | - | Output prefix for per-sample MEX |

### EmptyDrops Parameters (Advanced)

| Flag | Default | Description |
|------|---------|-------------|
| `--soloFlexEdNiters` | 10000 | Monte Carlo simulation iterations |
| `--soloFlexEdFdrThreshold` | 0.001 | FDR threshold for cell calling |
| `--soloFlexEdLower` | 100 | Lower UMI bound for ambient profile |

## Output Structure

```
output/
├── Solo.out/Gene/raw/          # Raw MEX (all barcodes)
│   ├── barcodes.tsv
│   ├── features.tsv
│   └── matrix.mtx
└── per_sample/                  # Per-sample filtered MEX
    ├── BC001/Gene/filtered/
    ├── BC002/Gene/filtered/
    └── flexfilter_summary.tsv   # Cell calling statistics
```

## Building References

The flex pipeline requires a hybrid reference genome that includes pseudo-chromosomes for probe sequences. Scripts are provided in `scripts/` to build these references:

```bash
# Build filtered hybrid reference (recommended)
./scripts/build_filtered_reference.sh \
  --probe-set probes.csv \
  --base-fasta /path/to/genome.fa \
  --base-gtf /path/to/genes.gtf \
  --work-dir work

# Build STAR index
./scripts/make_filtered_star_index.sh \
  --filtered-reference work/filtered_reference \
  --output-dir work/star_index \
  --threads 24
```

See [scripts/README.md](scripts/README.md) for detailed usage and additional options.

## Building STAR-Flex

Standard STAR build process:

```bash
cd source
make -j8
```

The flex objects are automatically included in the build.

## Testing

See [docs/TESTING_flex.md](docs/TESTING_flex.md) for detailed testing instructions.

Quick test:

```bash
./tests/run_flex_multisample_test.sh
```

Gold standard comparison files are bundled in `tests/gold_standard/`.

## Code Organization

```
source/
├── libflex/                    # Core flex filtering library
│   ├── FlexFilter.cpp/h        # Main filter orchestration
│   ├── EmptyDropsMultinomial.cpp/h  # Full EmptyDrops
│   ├── OrdMagStage.cpp/h       # Simple EmptyDrops (OrdMag)
│   └── OccupancyGuard.cpp/h    # Occupancy-based filtering
├── solo/
│   └── CbCorrector.cpp/h       # CB correction with pseudocounts
├── SampleDetector.cpp/h        # Sample tag detection
├── InlineCBCorrection.cpp/h    # Inline hash CB correction
├── UMICorrector.cpp/h          # Clique-based UMI correction
├── MexWriter.cpp/h             # MEX matrix output
├── GeneResolver.cpp/h          # Probe-to-gene mapping
├── SoloFeature_flexfilter.cpp  # FlexFilter integration
├── SoloFeature_writeMexFromInlineHashDedup.cpp
└── UmiCodec.h                  # UMI encoding/decoding helpers
```

## Compatibility

- Baseline: STAR 2.7.11b
- When `--flex no` (default), behavior is identical to upstream STAR
- Upstream `README.md` and `CHANGES.md` are not modified

Commit message:

restored pvalue based EmptyDrops and updated flex README

README_flex.md, after:

# STAR-Flex: Inline Hash Pipeline for 10x Flex Samples

This document describes the flex pipeline integration in this STAR fork.

## Overview

STAR-Flex extends STAR with an inline hash-based pipeline optimized for 10x Genomics Flex (Fixed RNA Profiling) samples using probes for transcript detection and RTL tags for multiplexing. We generate a hybrid reference with the regular genome and with synthetic chromosomes for each of the probes. This allows to use the STAR alignment routines to quantify probe alignment and use the genomic hits to confirm the match and detect off-probe noise. However, the rest of the workflow diverges from the standard STAR solo workflow, largely due to the presence of RTL tags for multiplexing samples. Because these are on the same mate as the probe and not the cell barcode, STAR's barcode and UMI correction, and UMI deduping routines could not be used. Furthermore, the noise characteristics of Flex are different that the native STAR's multimapping ad emptyDrops functions could not be used. A fast inline path was created to handle Flex processing after STAR alignment.

1. **Sample tag detection** during alignment identifies multiplexed sample barcodes
2. **Inline hash capture** stores CB/UMI/gene tuples directly in memory
3. **Cell Barcode (CB) correction** applies 1MM pseudocount-based correction (Cell Ranger compatible)
4. **UMI correction** uses clique-based 1MM deduplication
5. **Cell filtering** via OrdMag (simple EmptyDrops) or full EmptyDrops per sample
6. **Tag occupancy filtering** via Monte Carlo estimation of the expected distribution of samples per cell barcode
7. **MEX output** produces raw and per-sample filtered matrices

When `--flex no` (default), STAR behavior is identical to upstream.

For detailed technical documentation of the data flow and algorithms, see [docs/flex_methodology.md](docs/flex_methodology.md).

## Quick Start

```bash
STAR \
  --genomeDir /path/to/flex_reference \
  --readFilesIn R2.fastq.gz R1.fastq.gz \
  --readFilesCommand zcat \
  --soloType CB_UMI_Simple \
  --soloCBwhitelist /path/to/737K-fixed-rna-profiling.txt \
  --flex yes \
  --soloFlexExpectedCellsPerTag 3000 \
  --soloSampleWhitelist sample_whitelist.tsv \
  --soloProbeList probe_list.txt \
  --soloSampleProbes probe-barcodes-fixed-rna-profiling-rna.txt \
  --soloSampleProbeOffset 68 \
  --soloFlexOutputPrefix output/per_sample \
  --soloMultiMappers Rescue \
  --soloCBmatchWLtype 1MM_multi_Nbase_pseudocounts \
  --soloUMIfiltering MultiGeneUMI_CR \
  --soloUMIdedup 1MM_CR \
  --soloFeatures Gene \
  --outFileNamePrefix output/
```

## Required Inputs

| Input | Description |
|-------|-------------|
| Flex reference genome | Hybrid genome with probe pseudo-chromosomes (see [Building References](#building-references)) |
| CB whitelist | 10x barcode whitelist (e.g., `737K-fixed-rna-profiling.txt`) |
| Sample whitelist | TSV mapping sample tag sequences to labels |
| Probe list | Gene list from probe set |
| Sample probe barcodes | 10x probe barcode sequences file |

## Parameters

### Master Switch

| Flag | Default | Description |
|------|---------|-------------|
| `--flex` | `no` | Enable flex pipeline (`yes`/`no`) |

### Sample Detection

| Flag | Default | Description |
|------|---------|-------------|
| `--soloSampleWhitelist` | - | Path to sample tag whitelist TSV |
| `--soloProbeList` | - | Path to probe gene list |
| `--soloSampleProbes` | - | Path to 10x sample probe barcodes |
| `--soloSampleProbeOffset` | 0 | Offset in read for sample probe sequence |
| `--soloSampleSearchNearby` | `yes` | Search nearby positions for sample tag |
| `--soloSampleStrictMatch` | `no` | Require strict match for sample tag |

### FlexFilter (Cell Calling)

| Flag | Default | Description |
|------|---------|-------------|
| `--soloFlexExpectedCellsPerTag` | 0 | Expected cells per sample tag |
| `--soloFlexExpectedCellsTotal` | 0 | Total expected cells (alternative to per-tag) |
| `--soloFlexAllowedTags` | - | Optional: restrict to specific sample tags |
| `--soloFlexOutputPrefix` | - | Output prefix for per-sample MEX |

### EmptyDrops Parameters (Advanced)

| Flag | Default | Description |
|------|---------|-------------|
| `--soloFlexEdNiters` | 10000 | Monte Carlo simulation iterations |
| `--soloFlexEdFdrThreshold` | 0 (disabled) | FDR threshold for cell calling; if set (>0), FDR gate is used |
| `--soloFlexEdPvalueThreshold` | 0.05 | Raw p-value threshold when FDR gate is disabled (default behavior) |
| `--soloFlexEdLower` | 100 | Lower UMI bound for ambient profile |

## Output Structure

```
output/
├── Solo.out/Gene/raw/          # Raw MEX (all barcodes)
│   ├── barcodes.tsv
│   ├── features.tsv
│   └── matrix.mtx
└── per_sample/                  # Per-sample filtered MEX
    ├── BC001/Gene/filtered/
    ├── BC002/Gene/filtered/
    └── flexfilter_summary.tsv   # Cell calling statistics
```

## Building References

The flex pipeline requires a hybrid reference genome that includes pseudo-chromosomes for probe sequences. Scripts are provided in `scripts/` to build these references:

```bash
# Build filtered hybrid reference (recommended)
./scripts/build_filtered_reference.sh \
  --probe-set probes.csv \
  --base-fasta /path/to/genome.fa \
  --base-gtf /path/to/genes.gtf \
  --work-dir work

# Build STAR index
./scripts/make_filtered_star_index.sh \
  --filtered-reference work/filtered_reference \
  --output-dir work/star_index \
  --threads 24
```

See [scripts/README.md](scripts/README.md) for detailed usage and additional options.

## Building STAR-Flex

Standard STAR build process:

```bash
cd source
make -j8
```

The flex objects are automatically included in the build.

## Testing

See [docs/TESTING_flex.md](docs/TESTING_flex.md) for detailed testing instructions.

Quick test:

```bash
./tests/run_flex_multisample_test.sh
```

Gold standard comparison files are bundled in `tests/gold_standard/`.

## Code Organization

```
source/
├── libflex/                    # Core flex filtering library
│   ├── FlexFilter.cpp/h        # Main filter orchestration
│   ├── EmptyDropsMultinomial.cpp/h  # Full EmptyDrops
│   ├── OrdMagStage.cpp/h       # Simple EmptyDrops (OrdMag)
│   └── OccupancyGuard.cpp/h    # Occupancy-based filtering
├── solo/
│   └── CbCorrector.cpp/h       # CB correction with pseudocounts
├── SampleDetector.cpp/h        # Sample tag detection
├── InlineCBCorrection.cpp/h    # Inline hash CB correction
├── UMICorrector.cpp/h          # Clique-based UMI correction
├── MexWriter.cpp/h             # MEX matrix output
├── GeneResolver.cpp/h          # Probe-to-gene mapping
├── SoloFeature_flexfilter.cpp  # FlexFilter integration
├── SoloFeature_writeMexFromInlineHashDedup.cpp
└── UmiCodec.h                  # UMI encoding/decoding helpers
```

## Compatibility

- Baseline: STAR 2.7.11b
- When `--flex no` (default), behavior is identical to upstream STAR
- Upstream `README.md` and `CHANGES.md` are not modified
